# Software vulnerability detection through an Agent-based Architecture and CodeQL queries

This is a Master's thesis project that aims to develop an agent-based architecture for generating new, more accurate and predictive CodeQL queries. 
CodeQL queries, written in .ql files, are used by the CodeQL SAST tool to analyze source code and detect potential vulnerabilities. 
The proposed architecture is intended to automate and enhance the creation of these queries trying to improve their quality and abilities to indetify previously uncovered security issues.

---

## High-level Pipeline

The project executes a 6 steps pipeline:

### **1. Input**
Arguments required:
-  --dataset-path, path to the directory containg all the vulnerable files.
-  --memory_path, path to the shared memory JSON file

Example of running:
```
python3 main.py vulnerable_code agent_memory.json
```
### **2. Orchestrator Agent**
The Orchestrator Agent manages all the workflow coordinating the interaction between the other agents.

### **3. Analyzer Agent: Dataset Analysis**
The Analyzer Agent invokes the CodeQL tool to scan each file. Steps:
- the Analyzer Agent call the `CodeQLSastTool`
- the tool creates a CodeQl database wiht this command:
`CODEQL_CLI database create CODEQL_DB_PATH --language=python --source-root`
where "CODEQL_CLI" is the command to invoke CodeQL CLI, "CODEQL_DB_PATH" the path to the new CodeQL database and "source-root" is the path to the source code directory
- the tool analyzes the new database with:
`CODEQL_CLI database analyze CODEQL_DB_PATH queries_to_run --format=sarifv2.1.0 --output`
where "queries_to_run" are the eventual new queries that will be crated for the other agents, "format=sarifv2.1." is the output report format and "output" is the path to it.
- the agent calls the ParseSarifTool to parse the sarif report in a way much more understandable for the LLMs.
- note: the Analyzer agent is not a ReAct agent because it doesn't reason but just invokes the necessary tools.

### **4. Suggestor Agent**
The Suggest Agent, a ReAct agent, takes the output of the Analyzer, studies the vulnerablities contained in it and reasons about some suggestions to create new, more accurate and predictive CodeQL queries. rIt does not create proper code for the queries but just suggestions to facilitate the Creator Agent's job.
It can call this tools:
- WebSearchTool: for web searching if the agent requires some insights about vulnerabilities or CodeQL queries
- SuggestTool: tool to generate a detection plan for a new CodeQL query
The report generated by the Agent is saved in `sast_report.md`.

### **5. Creator Agent**
The Creator Agent is a ReAct agent as well that takes the report of the Suggestor as input and writes down the CodeQL queries into '.ql' files. These files are saved in the "generated_queries" directory.
Tool it can use:
- WriteQueryTool: tool to generate CodeQL query for a given CWE.

### **6. Output**
The output is a simple message of success.

An example of the exact line-by-line output produced when running the code is contained in the "result.txt" file.

---

## Installation
Ensure to have `codeql` installed on your machine. You can do that through this link:
`https://github.com/github/codeql`
Install the necessary queries with:
```
./codeql pack install codeql/python-queries
```

Create and activate a virtual environment
```
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
```

Export the OpenAI API key
```
echo "OPENAI_KEY=PUT_YOUR_API_KEY_HERE" >> .env
```

Install the necessary requirements contained in the "requirements.txt" file:
```
 pip install -r requirements.txt
```











